Post: dropping MySQL (#1404)
theforeman/theforeman.org: _includes/manuals/nightly/3.7_migration.md

### Migrating to PostgreSQL

> Starting from Foreman 1.25/2.0, MySQL is no longer a supported database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from Foreman 1.25, MySQL is no longer a supported database
```
(at least until we agree on it)

management system. This chapter describes the process of migrating from MySQL
to PostgreSQL.

Full backup is absolutely necessary before starting the process. We recommend
both database dump and snapshot of whole operating system and data if possible
when running in a VM or on a LVM.

#### Prerequisites

It's a good idea to delete unwanted records from the database. The smaller the
database is, the faster the migration process will be. Typical offenders are
audit records, facts and reports. Foreman ships with rake tasks and cron job to
execute these cleanup tasks, but they can be executed manually. Steps are shown
down below after all instances are stopped.

Foreman does not support plugin uninstallation, any leftovers in the database
might cause issues during migration.

#### Preparing the environment

The first step is to install required dependencies:

    yum install foreman-postgresql

or

    apt-get install foreman-postgresql

Next, stop all your foreman instances and make sure, they stay stopped during
the migration. On Red Hat compatible systems, you need to stop the `httpd` and

> (if applicable) `foreman-tasks` service. On EL7, there is a helper utility

Reviewer: Still missing the service name for debian (apache2 iirc)

Author: Missed this one.

> called `foreman-maintain` when installed to ease the process of shutting down

Reviewer: ```suggestion
called `foreman-maintain` that can be used to ease the process of shutting down
```

services. Make sure that neither Puppet nor a monitoring system automatically
starts these services again.

You can issue the MySQL command `SHOW FULL PROCESSLIST;` to show you all active
connections to your MySQL database. Make sure that there are none.

The foreman user that has access to your Postgresql database and is used for
the conversion temporarily needs super user privileges.

```bash
## postgres@postgres:~  $ su - postgres
## postgres@postgres:~  $ psql
psql (9.6.2)
Type "help" for help.

postgres=# ALTER USER foreman WITH SUPERUSER;
ALTER ROLE
postgres=#
```

#### Pre-migrate cleanup (optional)

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps first suggest truncating these table if they are not needed? that would be much faster then deleting possibly millions of records. Also, are there other tables we might suggest cleaning up, such as facts?

Author: I'd rather advertise the clean way of doing things. I am going to do add a note that truncate is an option.

configured as the production database and the new target database is configured
as the development database. All data in the development database will be
overwritten.

You can configure the new database as Foreman's new development database by
adding a new connection in `/etc/foreman/database.yml`.

It may look like this:

```yaml
# The new target database
development:
  adapter: postgresql
  host: postgres.example.com
  port: 5432
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25

# The old source database
production:
  adapter: mysql2
  host: mysql.example.com
  port: 3306
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25
```

In the next step, call a rake task which will create new database:

```sh
forman-rake db:create RAILS_ENV=development
```

The new database needs to be set up with all the tables required for Foreman to
operate, so in order to prepare the new database to receive the actual data, we
need to run all of Foreman's database migrations.

```sh
foreman-rake db:migrate RAILS_ENV=development
```

Before proceeding with the actual data migration, it's required to do separate
migration of dynflow tables.

```sh

> foreman-rake dynflow:migrate

Reviewer: Isn't this step done as part of the migration script now? Thinking of which, should we also run the regular migration task as part of it? (my main though is this is a very long process, the fewer manual steps the user has to do the better)

Author: I don't think so. More than that, it's not yet merged: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pull/6962

Reviewer: That will be merged once @adamruzicka gets back to the comments. 
My thought is that these tasks should be idempotent, so we can call them as part of the prod2dev flow to make sure the target db is in the right state. if we do that, we can make these instruction simpler for the users - so less chance of missing a step causing the next step to fail.

```

Next, we can finally migrate all the data. This will take a long time depending
on the size of your database. It is highly recommended to run this in a screen
or tmux session.

```sh
forman-rake db:convert:prod2dev

```

Postgresql uses sequences in order to store the next free primary key id for a
table. These sequences do not get updated by the rake tasks and have to be
adjusted manually.

```sh

> forman-rake sequence:reset RAILS_ENV=development

Reviewer: Let's call this as part of the convert script as well and not bother the user with another manual step

Author: I disagree, there is no such thing as the convert script. We do have `db:convert:prod2dev` which is a generic production to development convert script - your target database don't need to be PostgreSQL at all. I want to stick with least surprise, thus an explicit step is better. It's also better when calling for help - it's more obvious at which point something failed or what to do.

Reviewer: Whenever prod2dev is called and the target db is postgres we would need to call this task, which is a noop anyways when the db isn't posgres. 
Users shouldn't need to care about database internals - they want to migrate from one db to the other. If this fails we'll be able to tell from the error what fails, and if they care about what the internals of the task does they can read it.

```

#### Wrapping up

Then, make sure to resore the original permissions of your foreman database
user. This can be done on Postgresql by issuing this SQL command.

```sql
ALTER ROLE "foreman" NOSUPERUSER;
```

To switch your Foreman instance to the new database, you need to change the
production database configuration in `/etc/foreman/database.yml` to point to
the development installation we configured earlier. You can either do this

> manually or re-run foreman-installer with the new parameters for Postgresql.

Reviewer: It's not clear what needs to be changed here if done manually or what are the new installer parameters for postgresql (and what parameters need to be reset to remove the mysql settings)

Author: Added bunch of instructions.

Then you can finally start Foreman's services again.

```sh

> systemctl start httpd.service

Reviewer: or apache2

### Migrating to PostgreSQL

Starting from Foreman 1.25/2.0, MySQL is no longer a supported database
management system. This chapter describes the process of migrating from MySQL
to PostgreSQL.

> Full backup is absolute necessary before starting the process. We recommend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Full backup is absolutely necessary before starting the process. We recommend
```

both database dump and snapshot of whole operating system and data if possible
when running in a VM or on a LVM.

#### Prerequisites

It's a good idea to delete unwanted records from the database. The smaller the

> database is, the faster will be the migration process. Typical offenders are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database is, the faster the migration process will be. Typical offenders are
```

audit records, facts and reports. Foreman ships with rake tasks and cron job to
execute these cleanup tasks, but they can be executed manually. Steps are shown
down below after all instances are stopped.

Foreman database must be cleaned up from any leftovers from uninstalled

> plugins. When a Foreman plugin is activated, database migration is perfored and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugins. When a Foreman plugin is activated, database migration is performed and
```

new tables and indices are created. However when a plugin is uninstalled and
deactivated, no tables are ever dropped and the data is left in the database
forever. It's good idea to review at least OS installed package log to find out
if any foreman package was ever uninstalled. Unfortunately, there is no list of

> tables for each plugin.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how helpful this is - say they manage to find out what plugins were uninstalled, what then? we don't have instructions for cleaning up any leftovers and would need to help any users hitting issues because of that. It isn't just tables and indices, it could also be foreign keys, sti types and more. Perhaps it would be better to only warn that if any plugins have been uninstalled there may be issues and point to discourse for help or suggest reinstalling the plugins at least just for the migration step?

Author: Ok will do.

#### Preparing the environment

> This blog post assumes that you already have the source and target databases

Reviewer: this is no longer a blog post

> set up. Make sure to setup the Postgresql database with UTF-8 enabled.

Reviewer 2: how does one do that? using the installer? imho you need to allow the user to copy-paste, or even write a small script to automate the migration.

Author: Yeah I also noticed that later on, I have removed this completely, everything is UTF-8 by default these days. Maybe @timogoebel remember why he added that?

The first step is to install required dependencies:

>     yum install -y foreman-postgresql

Reviewer: what about deb?

Next, stop all your foreman instances and make sure, they stay stopped for

> good. On Red Hat compatible systems, you need to stop the `httpd` and (if

Reviewer: stay stopped during the migration

> good. On Red Hat compatible systems, you need to stop the `httpd` and (if

Reviewer: on debian?

Author: Not following.

Reviewer: you gave the service name for rh systems, on debian it's apache2 iirc

applicable) `foreman-tasks` service. There is a helper utility called

> `foreman-maintain` when installed to ease the process of shutting down

Reviewer: only on EL right now.

services. Make sure that neither Puppet nor a monitoring system automatically
starts these services again.

You can issue the MySQL command `SHOW FULL PROCESSLIST;` to show you all active

> connections to your MySQL database. Make sure, there are none.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connections to your MySQL database. Make sure that there are none.
```

> TODO: (WHY DO WE NEED THIS): If you are using the foreman-tasks plugin, you

Reviewer: Is this still needed? we should get this into the migration script if needed instead of manually patching from @timogoebel 's gist. cc: @adamruzicka

Reviewer 3: dynflow uses tables that aren't managed by rails. That's why the migration script can't find a corresponding rails model and bails out.

Reviewer 4: What @timogoebel said, Dynflow uses Sequel to access the db and does its own migrations.

Reviewer: Than why not just add the patch to the convert script? looking at the patch on the gist, it should be a noop if tasks isn't installed?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, we can add it to core and ship it with a release.

Reviewer: let's do it than and get it into 1.23 please, along with the post-migration sequence step.

Author: I think I saw a patch somewhere but can't find it. Can you guys point me on it if such a thing exists?

Author: Found it: https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pull/6962

need to patch the script we are using to migrate the data. If you are not sure,
wether you use this plugin, check if you have an entry `Tasks` in Foreman's
Monitor menu. If you are still not sure, it is safe to apply the patch in any
case.

```sh
wget -O /tmp/convert-tasks-patch.diff https://gist.githubusercontent.com/timogoebel/cd29e5206678ca0e0d78222af70583ec/raw/bbe998624098c1c3e656fe2582d33b0d9f9285aa/0001-convert-skip-foreman-tasks-tables.patch
yum install patch -y
cd /usr/share/foreman

patch -p1 < /tmp/convert-tasks-patch.diff
```

The foreman user that has access to your Postgresql database and is used for

> the conversion temporarily needs super user privileges.

Reviewer 2: how would one create the account in the first place? traditionally this has been done by the installer.

Author: You don't need super privileges, what you really need is grant to create tables which we handle in the installer. For the migration using super user is probably fine.

```bash
## postgres@postgres:~  $ su - postgres
## postgres@postgres:~  $ psql
psql (9.6.2)
Type "help" for help.

postgres=# ALTER USER foreman WITH SUPERUSER;
ALTER ROLE
postgres=#
```

#### Migrating

> Before proceeding migration, it's a good idea to permanently delete all audit

Reviewer: Add a heading - pre-migration cleanup? Also, perhaps it is simpler and faster to truncate all the reports and audits tables?

Reviewer 2: tbh I don't think we would like to ask users to delete their audits, only if they dont use it, I would just say it can speed things up, but recommend users to delete it.

Author: We do this via cron anyway both for reports and (now) for audits. I will update the heading.

Author: Marked the title as "optional" tho.

> records older than few days:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
records older than few days, unless they are required for compliance reasons:
```

    foreman-rake audits:expire days=10 RAILS_ENV="production"

To permanently delete all reports older than 2 days:

    foreman-rake reports:expire days=2 batch_size=50000 sleep_time=0.000001 RAILS_ENV="production"

The command above deletes records in batches of 50k items, it can take a lot of
time to process all records. In both cases, progress can be seen in the
`production.log`.

To migrate the data from one database to the other, we will use a rake task.

> You might already be familiar to this task from upgrading Foreman to a newer

Reviewer: This isn't a task normally used in upgrades, i think we can drop this sentence.

version.

> Command `foreman-rake -T` lists all available tasks. We will be using

Reviewer: I think we can drop the -T sentence and combine the second one with the previous paragraph

`foreman-rake db:convert:prod2dev` to migrate the data.

Foreman internally uses a development framework called Rails. In Rails, you can
have a specific configuration for e.g. a development and a production
environment. Our prod2dev rake task assumes, that the source database is
configured as the production database and the new target database is configured
as the development database. All data in the development database will be
overwritten.

You can configure the new database as Foreman's new development database by

> adding a new connection in `/etc/foreman/database.yml`.

Reviewer 2: tbh I would patch the script to read the definitions from elsewhere, we can provide a simple yaml file with source/destination instead of messing up with rails settings.

Author: Well, I am not keen doing that, I can test that once or twice on my environment and I don't want this to be rather for the worse.

It may look like this:

```yaml
# The new target database
development:
  adapter: postgresql
  host: postgres.example.com
  port: 5432
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25

# The old source database
production:
  adapter: mysql2
  host: mysql.example.com
  port: 3306
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25
```

The new database needs to be set up with all the tables required for Foreman to
operate, so in order to prepare the new database to receive the actual data, we
need to run all of Foreman's database migrations.

```sh

> forman-rake db:migrate RAILS_ENV=development

Reviewer: Don't we also need to run `db:create` first?

Reviewer 2: exactly, really depending on how you configured pg, its users etc

```

Next, we can finally migrate all the data. This will take a long time depending
on the size of your database. It is highly recommended to run this in a screen
or tmux session.

```sh
forman-rake db:convert:prod2dev

```

#### Wrapping up

Postgresql uses sequences in order to store the next free primary key id for a
table. These sequences do not get updated by the rake tasks and have to be

> adjusted manually. On MySQL, this is not needed as the concept of sequences is

Reviewer: Should we add this script to the migration script in case the target is pg?

Reviewer 3: I think this would be great to have. Or another rake task that runs the commands on the database if it's mysql. Updating the sequences should be rather safe to do.

Author: Into which migration script, `prod2dev` is not supposed to do MySQL migrations.

not known there.

The Postgresql Wiki has a [script to repair the
sequences](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Fixing_Sequences). Copy the script
and save it to a file, e.g. `sequences.sql`. Then run it like this:

```sh
su - postgres
vim sequences.sql

> # Paste the script and save the file

Reviewer: Didn't we already save the file before?

Author: Replaced with https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pull/6974

psql foreman -Atq -f reset.sql -o temp
psql -f temp --username postgres foreman
rm temp
```

Then, make sure to resore the original permissions of your foreman database
user. This can be done on Postgresql by issuing this SQL command.

```sql
ALTER ROLE "foreman" NOSUPERUSER;
```

To switch your Foreman instance to the new database, you need to change the
production database configuration in `/etc/foreman/database.yml` to point to
the development installation we configured earlier. You can either do this
manually or re-run foreman-installer with the new parameters for Postgresql.

Then you can finally start Foreman's services again.

```sh
systemctl start httpd.service

> systemctl start foreman-tasks.service

Reviewer: doesn't httpd also start tasks now?

Reviewer 4: I'm not aware of it. Why would it do that?

Reviewer 5: No, it doesn't the installer ensures it's running. The current name of `foreman-tasks` is `dynflowd` btw. `foreman-tasks` is a legacy alias.

Reviewer: Ok, ignore me, i was thinking of the dev environment which also starts dynflow.

Reviewer: would still be good to change the service name though

Author: Changed to dynflowd then.

have a specific configuration for e.g. a development and a production
environment. Our prod2dev rake task assumes, that the source database is
configured as the production database and the new target database is configured
as the development database. All data in the development database will be
overwritten.

You can configure the new database as Foreman's new development database by
adding a new connection in `/etc/foreman/database.yml`.

It may look like this:

```yaml
# The new target database
development:
  adapter: postgresql
  host: postgres.example.com
  port: 5432
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25

# The old source database
production:
  adapter: mysql2
  host: mysql.example.com
  port: 3306
  database: foreman
  username: foreman
  password: "foreman"
  pool: 25
```

In the next step, call a rake task which will create new database:

```sh
forman-rake db:create RAILS_ENV=development
```

The new database needs to be set up with all the tables required for Foreman to
operate, so in order to prepare the new database to receive the actual data, we
need to run all of Foreman's database migrations.

```sh

> foreman-rake db:migrate RAILS_ENV=development

Reviewer: can we run this also inside the `mysql2pgsql` task?

Author: This can be dangerous - the db migration must be performed in the development Rails env. Now, the mysql2pgsql wrapper task today contains only conversion task which is Rails environment independent. However I am going to add another task which resets postgresql sequence and that already requires RAILS_ENV to be set correctly (production). If we merge the `db:migrate` here, there is a conflict in Rails environments.

It could be solved indeed but that can be confusing when adding more and more tasks into the wrapper one.

```

Next, we can finally migrate all the data. This will take a long time depending
on the size of your database. It is highly recommended to run this in a screen
or tmux session.

```sh

> foreman-rake db:convert:mysql2pgsql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
foreman-rake db:convert:prod2dev
```
